In this section, I'm discussing few questions and topics related to memory management and the garbage
collection.
This topic is of JavaScript language, and I'm going to raise three questions with this topic.
What is the concept of GC or garbage collection?
Is the first thing I'm going to discuss when you declare a variable object added or function, all are
stored somewhere in the memory.
Assume that you have an object.
A When your program starts, a location is created and data stored in this location.
There are multiple locations, in fact, to hold huge values, but we are making one box as a location
to simplify the presentation.
All right.
So this object is which has some data and stored in the location.
In between there might be some read write operations.
And what happens when the program ends?
Once the program ends, the party is over.
Now this location needs to be cleaned as it is of no use.
So when the program ends, this is the garbage which needs to be cleared.
Normal memory management or memory lifecycle can be thought of like this.
You have led to an object, a variable or a function that is an allocation of memory happens first,
then there might be some rewrite process.
This is a continuous process.
In fact, till the program ends and when the program ends free, these locations are releasing the memory.
In some programming languages, you can call routines to clear this garbage and some languages manage
it automatically.
But in short, clearing these free locations is the process of collecting the garbage or garbage collection,
or even sometimes referred as GC.
So I guess now you know, what is garbage collection?
And this explanation is general and applied to all programming languages.
Now let's talk about how this thing happens in JavaScript.
JavaScript is a high level language, so you do not need to allocate memory.
Memory allocation and releasing happens automatically, making the memory free in the process of garbage
collection.
And there is a routine who does it called the garbage collector.
And this GC process is also called Automatic Memory Management, with reference to JavaScript.
The garbage collection considers references and it tries to release the memory if a location is not
reachable.
Let's try to understand what is this reachability in JavaScript?
Let's take an example.
You have an object.
I select object is equal to that is a property I'm creating.
I'll say name is equal to orange.
Now what I will do, I will say let object is equal to null.
Now, if I directly say null, then what happens?
Object has a reference to name that is this orange and that reference is canceled now because object
is null.
So this name, this orange doesn't have any reference.
So this is something which needs to be cleared.
So this area which doesn't have any reference, nothing can exist.
This value is actually unreachable.
Or you can see that this location is not reachable.
Let's expand this code.
I say light object is equal to a value.
Let's a name orange again.
Then I will say light object one is equal to object.
Now here I am assigning object one with the object.
So here the reference will be passed.
It will look something like this.
This is the object.
And here is the object one.
The name Orange is shared by both the objects.
Now, in case if I say object is equal to null, then this will be removed.
This reference will be removed in case if we do the same thing with object one.
If I say object one is equal to null, then this reference will also be removed.
Then again, this name is unreachable.
That is an algorithm called Mach and sweep.
The logic is that the algorithm starts from the root object and checks for the reference is linked in
case.
If this algorithm finds unreachable locations, then those are the locations to be removed.
It appears something like this.
So what this mark and sweep logic will do?
It will start searching which values have references?
For example, it begins with global.
Now let's say this has a reference.
This value also has a reference.
This has a reference.
Further, there might be more references to other values as well.
But in case I assume that these three do not have any link, that means some object now is set to null
or some other way.
These values have become unreachable.
Then what Mark and Sweep will do?
Mark will mark all the referenced items.
But things which are unreachable, things which are not having any link to reference will be not marked.
And then the mark and sweep algorithm runs.
It will look for unmarked locations and it will clean it.
That's how the garbage collection happens.
All the modern browsers use mark and sweep algorithm in older browsers in case of circular reference.
That was a situation of memory.
Leaks assumed a situation where I have an object.
I'll say let teacher is equal to new teacher, which is assumed that it's a class and we have student
where I create another object called student and I just say New student.
Now it might happen that teacher or student is equal to student and student or teacher that equals to
teacher.
So now here what happens is that the properties are with a circular reference.
In this kind of situation.
Older browsers used to leave the memory in case only one of the object is set to null.
But now that's not the case.
The newer browsers are competent enough to handle these situations as well.
So to summarize, the concept of memory management and garbage collection in JavaScript, memory allocation
is done automatically.
As long as references exist, there will not be any cleaning or collecting the garbage.
If a location is unreachable, then that will be collected as a garbage or that memory will be released.
Let's discuss related questions of this topic.
First question how does GC work in JavaScript so well?
As long as JavaScript is concerned, whether it is in your environment or even in browser, right?
That is always a process because like browser also has like Chrome has V8 and the same V8 is working
with Node.
So the logic remains same mark and sweep process goes the same way.
The only thing is whichever global object is there from that global object, the mark and sweep process
starts.
It marks the values which are referenced and unreachable values.
Unreachable locations are cleared by a process called garbage collector.
Second question, explain mark and sweep algorithm's pattern.
So as I just mentioned, Mark and sweep is something which begins with the root element and then it
starts marking the reference to values and things which are not mugged.
Those will be cleared by this mark and sweep algorithm.
The third question is which situation can create a memory leak?
So this is a situation where we have circular reference and one of the object is set to null, then
the reference is lost.
In this case, it doesn't have idea whether it is to be cleaned or not.
This is the kind of situation where you can say that the memory leak happens, but it doesn't happen
with newer browsers.
So you do not have to worry anyway.
JavaScript is a higher level language, so you do not need to do anything for garbage collection.
But yes, you should know what garbage collection is.